<!--Topic description-->
<description>Learn how to make your Hi-Framework app Multilingual</description>

## What is i18n?

Internationalization (sometimes shortened to "I18N , meaning "I - eighteen letters -N") is the process of planning and implementing products and services so that they can easily be adapted to specific local languages and cultures.

## How i18n works in Hi?

The way frameworks implement i18n feature
### Default Language concept

Hi-Framework handles internationalization in a different way than most other frameworks. instead of not having labels, Hi-Framework allows you to specify a default language : this will be the primary language your application will speak. 

And Then?
Then we give your conditions to translate the messages of your default languages. You don't have to create language codes here. Just use your language naturally.

If you enjoy creating codes, we do not forbird it. It's possible.

## How to start? (Directory Structure)

Remember your web directory structure?

```xml
 |-- Web
        |-- WEB-INF
        |-- webroot    
        |-- views
        |-- templateName.html
        |-- templateName.js
```

Add a folder named i18n

```xml
  |-- Web
        |-- WEB-INF
        |-- i18n    
        |-- webroot
        |-- views
        |-- templateName.html
        |-- templateName.js
```

Inside i18n, you can put all of your translations. Let's assume your app has to be in portuguese and english. Since your default language is English(another assumption i'am making), you only need to have the translation to portuguese.

```
 |-- Web
        |-- WEB-INF
        |-- i18n  
            |-- pt.json
        |-- views
        |-- templateName.html
        |-- templateName.js
```

As you may have noticed above, translation files must be json's.

NOTE: if you like to use language codes.. or you want some labels of the default language translated, you can create a file with that lannguage as well

```xml
|-- Web
        |-- WEB-INF
        |-- i18n  
            |-- en.json
            |-- pt.json
        |-- views
        |-- templateName.html
        |-- templateName.js
```

And to apply that language by default, just go to hi.xml and set the default language as in the example below:

```xml
<app xmlns:xsi='http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance'
     xmlns='http://hi.co.mz/XMLSchema'
     xsi:schemaLocation='http://hi.co.mz/XMLSchema https://talk-code.github.io/releases/ns/hi-1.0.xsd'>
     
     <default-lang>en</default-lang>
   
</app>
```

This configuartion tells Hi Framework to apply the language "en" with translations in file "your-web-directory/i18n/en.json".


### Translation files composition

As I tould you before, translation files are JSON's.

- As the key, you have the label (In your default language)
- As the value, you have the corresponding translation
See example below:

- App default language: English
- Translating to: Portuguese
- Filename: pt.json

```xml
{
    "Previous":"Anterior",
    "Next":"Próximo"
}
```

### Markup Translation

We created an angular directive(translate) to help you translate your app.

See the markup below:

```xml
<label>Your name</label>

<input type="text" placeholder="Type your name.." />
```

It changes to this:

#### MODE 1 (Translating labels of default language)

```xml
<label translate>Your name</label>

<input type="text" placeholder="Type your name.." translate-placeholder translate />

```

What happened here?

when you put translate porperty in your element, Hi Framework looks for another porperty with a name starting with "translate-".

- If it don't find it, It translates the inner HTML of your element.(case of element label)

- If it find's it, it translate watever porperty name come after the hyphen. In the example above, "placeholder" will be translated.

Got it?

## So, how does the translation file looks like?

```javascript
{
    "Your name":"O seu nome",
    "Type your name..":"Escreva o seu nome.."
}
```

### MODE 2 (Using translation codes)

```xml
<label translate="code-for-your-name">Your name</label>

<input type="text" placeholder="Type your name.." translate-placeholder translate="code-for-type-your-name" />
```

WTF is this?

Well, that are your codes mate.

That way, the translation file will look like:

```xml
{
    "code-for-your-name":"O seu nome",
    "code-for-type-your-name":"Escreva o seu nome.."
}
```

Couldn't be simpler right?? I know! :)


### Code based values Translation

We created this function __t();

Yeah! two underscores + t.

So wherever you are (in a $scope or not), it just works!

See example:

```javascript
Hi.view(function($scope){
    _.savePerson = function(){
       alert("Person sucessfully saved!"); //Simple alert  
       alert(__t("Person sucessfully saved!")); //Translatable alert
       alert(__t("Person sucessfully saved!","person-saved-message-code")); //Translatable alert with translation code
     }  
}
```

That's it..

Oh! and you can also have something like this:

```html
<div ng-show="isPersonSaved">{{__t("Person sucessfully saved!")}}</div>
```

That div will only appear when the value of the variable isPersonSaved is true. (But that's angular, not Hi)

## Changing the language


our app is running and you are seeing all content in just one language. You want to change the language to some other.. Well, it's simple.

This is done in the server side, you must have a controller action or a frontier method ready, in order to get this done.

Go to your controller action/frontier method, and call the method setLanguage of mz.co.hi.web.FrontEnd as in the example.

```xml
frontEnd.setLanguage("pt");
```

With this instruction, Hi Framework will load translations of i18n/pt.json and apply in your application. (Hi reloads your application in this process)